hey good afternoon everyone how's
everybody doing all right so today we're
going to continue our discussion of
caches last time we talked about why we
want to introduce caches which is
basically to make it seem to the
processor like we have a large and fast
memory rather than a large and slow
memory and today we're going to actually
look into how we go about implementing
this memory system that consists of both
an SSRI of cash and a DRAM main memory
but just before we get started we have
some greetings from Japan Arvin sent us
this picture yesterday and hopefully you
can read the little note that's
specifically to you guys and in fact I'm
not sure if you can see it but right
here is that note hanging up in this
shrine
anyways so alright let's get started
with a little bit of review just so that
we before we get into the implementation
we're all on the same page so we learned
last time about the fact that we can
have different kinds of caches the most
basic one is your direct mapped cache
and this is what your direct mapped
cache looks like you basically have an
address which is a 32-bit address and we
divide that address up into three
portions the tag the index and the
offset and specifically if I have a
cache that has 2 to the K lines and I'm
going to need K index bits in order to
select which of the cache lines I'm
trying to access ok then I'm going to
have once I select the line I'm going to
look at all of the data that's in that
line and now remember that if our block
size is larger than 1 that I don't just
have you know one word stored in this
cache line I might have multiple words
which is what's shown here so now the
next thing that I need to do is look at
the tag of the line that I just fetched
and determine if it's equal to the tag
that I want and so I'm going to compare
the tag bits and
and I'm going to check whether the valid
bit is true or not
and finally if I got a hit then what I'm
going to do is I'm going to use the
offset bits in order to determine which
of the words in that cache line is the
one that I'm actually trying to access
and you'll notice here that the the bits
that we're using in order to select the
word are just B minus one down to two so
what happens with the bottom two bits
what are they used for it they're both
zero because our addresses are byte
addresses and we're always accessing
things at a word boundary okay
so if you wanted to figure out the
number of words in this cache line you'd
basically know that it's two to the B
bytes or two to be minus two words is
how many words we have in this cache
line any questions about that yes yes
yes no it's one tag so that's one of the
benefits of having block size larger
than one is that the proportion of your
cash that's used up for your tag bits is
much smaller no because you're assuming
that the things that are in the same
line are contiguous locations in memory
so you can figure out based on the
offset bits what exactly the address is
okay yes we know so it's a little
confusing the way it was drawn in the
previous lecture which is that the
bottom two bits are lumped into what we
call the offset and so the bottom two
bits are really just for word alignment
always and so they change our address
from a byte address to a word address
and then the rest of the offset bits are
the ones that we use in order to select
a word from within the line okay
anything else great so let's move on to
the other type of crashes that we
learned about which are n Way set
associative caches and so the idea here
is that the difficulty with direct
mapped cache is is that for any
particular address there's exactly one
cache line that it could map to and so
if you happen to want two addresses that
happen to map to the same cache line
they're not going to be able to live in
the cache at the same time so by
switching from a direct mapped cache to
an N Way set associative cache we can
have multiple things that map to the
same index in our cache at the same time
so typically the social Civic that's
generally used is between 4 & 8 but just
for our purposes we're gonna work on a
simpler model which is we're gonna
assume that we have a 2-way
set-associative cache as it's shown here
so now what happens what's different
from our direct mapped cache well
basically the index bits the K bits are
still used in order to
elect the line and now it's actually
selecting what we call a set so there's
one line in each of the two ways that's
being selected by that index okay then
what I need to do is I need to compare
by tag to the tag in both of those lines
and so I'm going to have here not only
the comparison in my first way but I
also need to compare the tag in my
second way and it's possible for me to
get a hit and either one of those now is
it gonna be possible for me to get a hit
in both you see some shaking of heads
who can tell me why we might not want
that yep
sure that's a good reason but also it
would just be a waste of space so
generally when we're designing our cash
we're going to make sure that a
particular address only lives in one way
of our cash okay so when we check to see
if it's there we check all of the ways
but we're guaranteed that if we found a
hit then that's the only place we're
gonna find the hit all right so the next
thing is you know I pull down the data
from both of these ways corresponding to
the index that was selected and now
depending on whether or not I got you
know a hit in way one or a hidden way to
or I just got a Miss altogether I'm
going to determine whether I'm going to
use the data that's coming from one of
these two caches or whether I'm going to
have to go and look it up in main memory
so assuming that one of them gave me a
hit then what I'm going to do is I'm
going to select suppose way one gave me
a hit then I'm going to get the data
that's in this way coming through this
multiplexer and now I'm going to use my
offset bits in order to select the
particular word that I was looking for
within that line of that way yes there's
a hit that's protected by this other
logic right here and so that's going to
control whether you're using this data
at all or whether you're going have
additional logic that's going off to the
main memory and making a request okay
all right terrific so that at a high
level summarizes what we learned last
time
all right so in recitation yesterday we
added a little bit more to that which
were there there's a few other questions
that we need to ask ourselves when
designing our caches so specifically
when we're doing the store we need to
ask ourselves what is our write back
policy so we have two choices hopefully
you're familiar with this we have a
write back policy and a write through
policy so a write back policy means that
you're only gonna write to main memory
when you're evicting the line from the
cache okay and so that saves you a lot
of bandwidth because you don't have to
right every single time to the main
memory because you might just be
overwriting it again so what was the
point of spending that effort the second
one is a write through policy which
basically keeps the cache and the memory
in sync and so every time you're writing
to your cache you're also writing to
your main memory all right now another
thing we probably haven't seen yet which
also oh sorry let me just one more thing
so in order to support right back caches
it's not enough to just have a valid bit
that's telling us you know is our data
valid or invalid we actually have to
have a little bit more information and
so now we want to know if our state is
one of three things that's either
invalid or it's clean and meaning that I
have valid data but I haven't modified
it or it's dirty meaning that it's valid
and but I did modify it and so the value
that I have in the cache is not
consistent with what I have in main
memory okay so the other thing that we
want to think about is what do we do on
a write miss so here once again we have
two choices I can either choose to bring
the line that I'm trying to access into
my cast when I have that Miss and then
do the right or I can say well I don't
want to bother bringing it into my cache
and I'm just gonna write directly to
main memory so the first one where we
bring it into our cache is what we refer
to as a Miss allocate scheme the second
one is a Miss no allocate and you'll see
that I've color-coded these so basically
usually what happens is that we use a
write back policy together with a right
miss allocate or you use a write through
policy together with a no allocate but
we're gonna stick to the red one so
we're gonna basically be using a write
back policy and right miss allocate okay
all right so now let's remind ourselves
you know what happens when we're
processing a load or a store so the
first thing that happens is we're going
to send the address that we're the
processor is going to send the address
of the memory location that it's trying
to access and the first thing we're
going to do is we're going to check our
cache to see if that
if the data for that location is in our
cache and so one of two things can
happen we either get find it in the
cache which we call a hit or we don't
find it in the cache which we call a
miss so if we have a hit then if it was
a load operation then what we're gonna
do is we're gonna return a copy of the
data that the processor was was
requesting from the cache line directly
and it's going to be returned quickly if
it's a store then we're gonna update the
word in the cache and if we're using a
write back policy we're also going to
change the state to dirty to indicate
that we wrote to that line now if it's a
Miss then what we have to do is we're
going to bring our line from the missing
line from a memory into our cache and so
we're going to first have to you know
select a line that's currently in the
cache that we're going to evict from our
cache and so there's going to be a
question of well how do I select which
one to take out of my cache and we'll
get to that in the next slide in just a
second but so once I've decided which
one I'm gonna take out of my cache then
I basically write if if that line was
dirty I would write it back to my main
memory and then I can go ahead and fetch
the value that I'm trying to actually
access from main memory and put it into
that location in the cache of the the
wherever the thing that I just evicted
from the cache was yes so we're gonna
get to that in a few lectures and yes
that's when we're gonna start to learn
about virtual memory and so for now you
know we're just telling you to think of
a model where a main memory has
everything but we will get to that as
well any other questions
okay great all right so as I mentioned
we need to decide you know which is the
line that we're going to replace and so
we have to think about what our
replacement policy is and there could be
many different replacement policies in
the case of a direct-mapped cache is
there a replacement policy at all do I
have any choice
no why not
yep
exactly so in a direct-mapped cache
given the address that I'm trying to
access that's the line that the the
value the line that's currently at that
index is what I'm going to have to evict
but in the case of set associative cache
then I do have some choices right I've
have n different ways so I can choose
one of those n ways as the one that I
want to get rid of from my cache in
order to bring you know one new value at
that index into my cache so how do I
pick which one well typically a very
common algorithm is to use what's called
least recently used and the reason we
want to use something like least
recently used is because of the locality
principle which is saying if I've used
something recently then I'm likely to
use it again so I don't want to get rid
of something in my cache that I just
used very recently because I'm likely to
want it again and then I'll get a Miss
the next time I access it so the my best
bet is to get rid of the thing that I
haven't used in the longest amount of
time okay and there are other policies
but at least recently used is kind of
the the most common and it's the one
that we're going to be implementing in
lab 6 and specifically if you just have
a 2-way set-associative cache then you
can actually implement least recently
used by just adding white one bit of
state to each of your of your cache
lines and you'll see that as part of
your implementation of a 2-way
set-associative cache in lab 6 ok so one
last question about our caste before we
actually get into the details of
implementing it is that we can have two
forms of a cache we call it either a
blocking cache or a non-blocking cache a
blocking cache is one where we can only
handle one request at a time so if you
know I get a Miss and I need to go over
to my main memory in order to to get the
value that I missed the cache can't at
that time continue to receive a new
request from the processor on the other
hand in a non-blocking cache it can and
so you can handle multiple requests at
the same time so while the main
is processing the miss request the cash
can continue to respond to other
requests as you can imagine the
non-blocking one is much more complex so
we're gonna focus on the blocking caches
and that's what we're going to be
implementing in this class okay so at
this point we've covered basically all
of the different ideas that we need to
consider in the design of our caches now
we're going to start to actually
implement them so we're gonna start with
our memory interfaces so you've seen
already this memory interface which
basically shows that when I try to
access a memory I have two possible
methods either request or response and
in the case of a request I basically
send a memory request type to it which
consists of three different pieces of
information it's got the operation that
I'm trying to do which is a load or a
store it's got the address of the
location I'm trying to access and in the
case of a store it also has the data
that I'm trying to write to that
location okay and for the response I'm
basically going to always return a word
meaning that as far as you know we're
dealing with our memories we're
basically assuming that our interfaces
are as simple as possible and as a
result the size of our memory and our
addresses are fixed okay so we're gonna
always treat our memory as having you
know 32-bit addresses and words being 32
bits at a high level okay now we're
gonna take this interface if we're gonna
bottle the same thing for our DRAM our
dynamic random-access memory and so here
once again we have a request and
response we have the two methods that we
need in order to communicate with our
main memory except that now instead of
trying to access one word at a time what
we're going to be doing is we're going
to be accessing an entire block or we
call an entire line right so if my cache
supports a block size of 16 meaning that
it holds 16 words per line then anytime
I go to the main memory
I'm gonna fetch 16 words at a time okay
because I'm gonna replace the entire
line in my cache every time I go to main
memory okay is that clear to everyone
okay great so so that's what I mean by
this line request over here and so
you'll see that it's very similar to a
memory request in that it provides the
operation we're performing it provides a
line address and in the case of a store
it provides the line that you're
actually going to write back to main
memory okay all right so now once again
also the DRAM is gonna be a fixed size
and the size that we're going to assume
for this class is 64 bytes and so that's
why I use the example of 16 words so
essentially every time we go to main
memory we're gonna be fetching 16 words
at a time okay and so finally comes our
SRAM which is what we use for our cache
in the case of our SRAM we do actually
want to specify what the size of it
specifically we want to specify how many
rows are in our cache and the way that
we do that is by providing the number of
index bits in this field right here
index size right so if I instantiate an
SRAM with 6 index bits that means that I
have 2 to the 6 lines in my cache and
then in addition the SRAM can hold any
data type and so when we instantiate
SRAM's we also specify what kind of data
it's holding right and so this will
allow me to do things like you know have
1 or 2 bit data for my state which is
keeping track of is something valid
clean or dirty it'll have you know an N
bit SRAM for the tag and then and it'll
have a 64 bytes SRAM for for the line
makind will see that in detail in just a
moment so the key is just that you know
as so as far as our SRM is concerned we
are specifying that the size of the SRAM
is 2 to the index size lines
okay so now let's start with our actual
implementation so encashed memory
systems we said that what's happening is
we have our processor which is kind of
represented here on the left which has
its register file and the PC the program
counter and it's communicating just with
the cache and so this is an SRAM based
cache and then the cache is going to
communicate with a with a dram or the
main memory on the back end if it's
being asked for some information that it
doesn't have yeah so it refers to when
you're getting fetching 16 words at a
time so in a general case it's basically
you know the number of words that you're
fetching from main memory at the same
time and if you recall when we studied
when we talked about just main memory
implementations we also mentioned that
it's you know pretty costly to get that
first byte for a main memory but it
turns out that it's only incrementally
more expensive to get you know bytes
that are nearby and so it turns out that
it's really not only because of locality
but also because it doesn't cost us that
much more to get the additional bytes we
generally when we get something from
main memory we get a chunk of data at a
time rather than just you know one byte
or one word okay
okay so so the difference here between
you know the acts of the requests that
the processor is making and the requests
that the SRAM is making is that these
are word requests so it's requesting
it's providing a 32-bit address and it's
expecting a 32-bit response whereas when
the SRAM request something from DRAM
it's making these line requests okay so
it's going to be requesting as I
mentioned sixteen words at a time okay
so if I need to
you know instantiate these two systems
all I would do is I would declare a dram
and an SRAM I would I have primitives
which are given for you which is make
DRAM and make SRAM and in the case of
SRAM I need to also specify how large it
is and so I provide the number of index
bits in order to specify how many lines
are in my cache and then I also provide
what kind of data is holding yes No
so it's I'll get to that okay
okay and so this is just reiterating
what I've been saying which is we're
going to assume 16 word lines okay okay
so here's the type of cache that we're
going to be implementing we're actually
going to be implementing two different
versions in lab 6 but we're gonna start
with a direct-mapped one and so we have
a one-way or direct mapped cache it's a
write-back right miss allocate and
blocking cache and so just to remind
ourselves quickly what each of those
things means the write back policy means
that we're going to use the dirty bit
and so we're only gonna write things
back to main memory when we Vic the line
from the cache the right miss allocate
means that on a Miss we're going to
always bring the line back into our into
our cache so we're never gonna just
write straight into our main memory and
the blocking cache means that we can
only process one request at a time all
right so let's first think about my
caste
so from my SRAM we said that my
interface was just I had two methods
requests and response but if we look at
our SRAM here how many you know methods
does it need to have it needs to have
four methods because it needs to support
the request and response from the
processor and it also needs to be able
to create a line request and deal with a
line response from the DRAM okay and so
what we're going to have is basically
another interface which is our cache
interface and in our cache interface we
actually have four different methods
which are the ones that that I just
mentioned and so in the case of a
request the input is going to request
and response the input and output are
just like what we had before with the
processor accessing SRAM and in the case
of the line request inline response now
we're using this new type that we just
declared which is a line request and
then we're returning an entire line
which is 64 bytes of data and so as I
mentioned the first two methods are the
processor side methods they're the way
that the processor communicates with the
cache and the other two methods are the
backside methods which is how the cache
makes requests and accept responses for
a main memory
now one thing that's kind of cool is if
you take a look here the only place
where we actually specify anything about
the cache size is in the in the
interface definition right up here so
the methods themselves don't actually
know anything about the cache size so
what that means is that a user of our
cache is ignorant of the size of our
cache they're basically just calling
these methods and it's only in the
instantiation of our cache where we
actually specified how large we wanted
our cache to be okay and so now our
memory instantiation changes just
slightly instead of instantiating an
SRAM what we're in
is this cash using the make blocking
cash method which again is given to us
alright so now let's dig a little deeper
so now inside of our cash we're going to
have this smaller basic unit which we
call a cash array unit okay
and so our cash array unit is going to
consist of three different SRAM's it's
going to have one for the data which is
this piece over here it's going to have
one for the tag and it's gonna have one
for the status okay and so the first
thing that we're gonna have to do sorry
is when we actually implement this is
declare those three types of SRAM's now
in addition to having this cash array
unit I have to have a way of
communicating with both my processor and
my back-end and so the way that we do
that is through queues or FIFO sand so
specifically for my line request and my
line response I need to have a queue
that allows me to as soon as I'm ready
with a request I put it in the queue and
then I'm ready to move on similarly
responses that come from the outside
world are waiting for me there until the
cash or a unit is ready to deal with
them and on the processor side we have a
hit cue which is where I'm going to put
the data that's ready for the processor
to receive and finally I also have two
pieces of state that I store which is a
status of where I am in dealing with
this cash request and a copy of the
current request so that I can extract
information about the address that's
being requested the depending on you
know which stage of my dealing with this
cash request I'm in alright so now
what's the functionality of this cash
array unit so it also has a set of
methods right so we're gonna have the
outside blocking cache and inside it
it's going to have this cash array unit
which you're going to implement as part
of lap six so the things that the cash
array unit can do is it's got three
methods that support
it can take a request it can provide a
response and it also has this update
method so let's see what each one of
those is so suppose you know that I have
I'm requesting something from my cache
or a unit and you can kind of think of
this cache of a unit as one way of a
cache okay so in the case of a direct
mapped cache you would just have one of
these cache array units in the case of a
2-way set-associative cache you would
have two of these cache array units okay
but at a basic level the cache array
units operate as independent things and
you just potentially need to access more
than one of them so if I'm you know
doing a load and I you know provide the
index that I'm that I'm trying to access
in my cache and I look up the tag from
that line and it turns out that I have a
hit then all I need to do is return the
the word that was requested if I did a
store and I also got a hit then in this
case I don't actually need to return
anything I just update my cache or a
unit now what about in the case of a
Miss in the case of a Miss what I want
to be able to do is to to potentially
evict a line from the cache so that I
can bring thyn line that I'm actually
trying to access into the cache and so
what we want the cache are a unit to
return in the case of a Miss is an
entire line so that if I need to if it's
dirty I can then go and make a separate
request to the main memory
and tell it to write that line back to
main memory okay so our responses from
our cache array unit are either a word
when I have a load hit nothing when I
have a store hit or an entire line when
I have a Miss okay
all right so let's start taking a look
at the interface of this Kasia rate unit
so as I mentioned we have these three
methods request response and update and
so let's take a look at what each of
those is doing so actually before we get
into that let's talk about these
particular data types that are being
passed as part of these methods so
specifically we introduced this new data
type called cache array unit response
and what it consists of is three things
so it's going to hold information about
whether you got a load hit a store hit
or a miss which were the three cases
that we just discussed and that's what's
mentioned in this enumeration right here
if we have a load hit it's going to
return the word that you're looking for
in the load value parameter and if we
have a Miss it's going to return the
entire line in the tag line parameter
okay now if we have to actually update
something because we're doing a store
then we're going to call an update
command and in that case we're going to
provide the index that we're trying to
access and the new line that we want to
write to add that in that index okay so
pretty straightforward I think yes so a
request is just asking to see if it has
something an update request is telling
it to change one of its lines okay
any other questions
yeah
oh sorry say that again oh that's just
an arbitrary name
oh sorry yes this should be hit and miss
type that's what you were trying to say
yeah okay sorry there's I've caught a
number of little mistakes in these
slides but not quite all of them all
right any other questions okay so let's
now go ahead and start implementing this
cache or a unit okay so we've got our
the first thing that we do is we are
gonna call a make cau or make a cache or
a unit and we have to feed it the number
of bits of our index and that's what is
referred to here as log n lines right so
log n lines is basically the number of
bits of index meaning that the number of
lines that I'm gonna have in my cache is
2 to the log n lines now for the rest of
this what is going to be given to you
guys is basically some code but also
some pseudocode because this is what
you're actually going to be implementing
in lab 6 yourselves so we want to give
you enough information to understand how
to do lab 6 but obviously still make it
a learning experience so first thing
that we're going to do in our cache
array unit is as I mentioned is we're
going to instantiate three different
s-trans we're going to have the status
SRAM the TAT the Tagus ram and the data
SRAM in addition we're going to have
internal to the cau some kind of status
register that's going to tell us what
state were in other than dealing with
our cache array unit request and we're
going to have a copy of the current
request so that once again we can refer
to it if we need to get the address that
was requested or anything like that all
right so what is our request look like a
request is going to basically initiate a
request to each one of these arrays and
it's going to take the current request
which we call our and save it into this
current request register that we have so
nothing too complicated what about our
response well in order to respond from
the cache array unit there's a number of
things that we have to do so first we
have to wait for these three SRAM's to
give to give us back information so once
they give me back information I'm going
to compare my tag I'm gonna use sorry so
first I'm gonna look at this at the
request and that's gonna tell me which
indexed you know am I actually looking
at and what cat what tag am I looking
for and what's the word offset that I
need and then I'm going to determine
whether I have you know a load hit a
store hit or a miss based on the line
that's being given back to me from this
cache or a unit so in the case of a load
hit as we mentioned we want to return
the word and so I would fetch that word
from the return line in the case of a
store I just update the word in the
cache or a unit and in the case of a
Miss I'm going to return the entire line
and then here we go sorry update is
basically going to receive a line as
input together with the index that that
line should be written to and it's going
to update my cache or a unit with that
line
okay yes yes rounds so don't think of
that we're trying we're trying to
implement a cache don't think of we're
trying to implement as an SRAM so a
cache consists of SRAM memory as its
fundamental core but so really the SRAM
is you a building block with it in order
to build our cache right so what we're
actually building is what we call this
blocking cache within this blocking
caste we have this cache array unit if
it's a direct mapped cache I have one of
these cache array units if it's a n way
set associative cache and I would have n
of these cache array units okay so we're
just trying to you know modularize it so
that the implementation of each piece is
as simple as possible so I guess
can be reduced to what's the benefit of
using SRAM's for these three components
of the CA you over choosing like an
array the benefit is the fact that s
trams are very fast so that's really
what we're trying to get here is we're
trying to get something that's going to
respond very quickly okay any other
questions all right terrific so as I
mentioned this is what you're going to
be building in lab 6 and we're gonna
give you a little bit more guidance ok
so now we're gonna take one step out
okay and so we just talked about this
cache array unit which is the thing in
this little orange box and now we're
back out to our entire blocking cache
okay so as I mentioned because this is a
direct mapped cache we just have one of
these cache array units in it and the
cache itself has these four methods
which we need to implement as well as
you know figure out how to deal with
these queues depending on what it is
that we're doing okay and so that's what
we're gonna talk about next
so the four methods that we have are
these request method response line
request and line response and we're
going to have to start off when we
create this cache by instantiating all
the different pieces of State okay so
what are my pieces of state in this
cache
what's the first thing I need to
instantiate
yeah I need to have a CA you okay so I'm
gonna call make CA you to instantiate a
CA you right now we talked about the
fact that I also have these cues okay so
I'm going to also instantiate three five
foes
one for each of my cues and I'm going to
instantiate two registers one to store
the current request and want to store
the state that I'm in okay now the FSM
that that the blocking cache is
basically following is one that has the
following set of states so I start off
in my ready state which means I'm ready
to accept a request next thing I do is I
go to the wait for cash or a unit
response so I ask my cash array unit for
information and I'm waiting for it to
respond if it gives me returns with a
hit then I'm just going to return that
data to my processor and I'm gonna go
back to the ready state and I'm ready to
start a new request if it has a Miss
then I'm gonna have to go through two
additional states which are send request
and wait DRAM response so send requests
is going to ask the main memory for the
piece of information that we're trying
to fetch then we're gonna have to wait
for the main memory to respond after it
responds we're going to update our cache
and then we'll be able to go back to the
ready state okay and so this is the
logic that you'll have to be implement
so first let's start with a three with a
four methods okay so in order to get
started in order to get a request it
needs to be the case that we're in the
state ready okay so we have this
condition of checking with that we're
and ready to get started and then the
method itself is relatively simple what
we're gonna do is we're gonna get this
memory request we're gonna pass it along
to the cau
we're gonna store it in this current
request register and we're gonna update
our state to go to our next state any
questions about that
okay how about a response so the
response what it's going to do is it's
just going to be looking at this cue to
determine whether something has been
placed into the queue or not so what I'm
trying to respond to my processor I'm
going to check is there something in my
hit Q and if there is I'm going to
return that by calling hit Q dot first
that basically returns the first element
of your Q and it's going to DQ that
element so that I now have room in my in
my Q to put a new value in okay and
remember that these things are happening
in parallel so whether I wrote the the
hit DQ doesn't happen you know before I
returned the value I'm always reading
first and then doing the DQ okay so now
what about on my main memory side so on
my main memory side I have a line
request which is basically going to talk
to the line request Q and so once again
it's going to basically pass to the
outside world that first element in that
Q if one exists and finally the line
response is going to do the reverse it's
going to get something from the main
memory and put it into this line
response queue by calling the NQ method
okay any questions about that yes
I guess blocking in those directions I
find multiple same time and the line
requests happening at same time on
so no way so it's completely just one
request at a time so basically imagine
you know the processor makes a request
if I have to go to main memory I have to
go to main memory I have to wait for
main memory to respond to me only then
am i responding to the processor and at
that point I'll go back to the ready
state and then the processor can make
another request okay yes yes so in the
in because this is a blocking cache then
there would be only one thing in the
queue but we're trying to kind of give
you you know the general picture of how
this would look so that even if you
wanted to implement something more
complex that you would have the the
framework to do it okay all right so now
let's talk about our rules okay so we
said that we have a bunch of rules where
you're going to we have to implement
we're going to go through a few of those
okay so first is the wait for cash or a
unit response so what's going to happen
here what's gonna happen is we first
need to wait till there is a response so
this is essentially an implicit guard in
other words this rule won't fire until
the cache are a unit actually has a
response to us once it has a response
then what I'm gonna do is I'm gonna put
it into this variable X and then I can
look at the various pieces of that
response so remember the first thing
that is included in the response is
whether I got a load hit a store hit or
a Miss and so depending on that case I'm
going to do different things yeah
here yeah after it I'm not a hundred
percent sure if they're there it's
always safe to put the parentheses it's
possible that they're optional okay all
right so what do we do on a load hit
what on a load hit the cache array unit
is going to return the value in the load
value field and so we're going to take
that load value field we're gonna put it
into some variable V and then we're
going to put that V into our hit Q so
that the processor can now come and
fetch that value from our hit Q okay and
then we're going to go back to the ready
state because we had a hit and so we're
ready to start all over again in the
case of a store hit we don't have to
return anything so here all we do is
just immediately go back to the ready
State okay the one that's more
complicated obviously is the Miss so
let's talk about what happens on a Miss
so on a Miss we're gonna get an entire
line back from the cache or a unit so
we're going to take a look at that line
and the first thing we're gonna check is
is it dirty okay if it's dirty that
means I need to write it back to main
memory okay so if it's dirty then I'm
going to initiate a line request which
is going to say store you know this line
that I just fetched from I see got back
from I see a you sorry this address
which I can actually determine from my
original request in the in the register
that I saved as well as the line that
was returned to me and then I'm gonna go
to the send request state meaning that I
just sent a request to my main memory
now if it wasn't dirty then I can skip
the send request state and immediately
go to make my request for the new piece
of data that I want from my dear M okay
and so in this case what I'm going to do
is I'm going to figure out what's the
address of the the new value that I'm
trying to get and I'm going to initiate
request which says do a load of this new
address and give me back that data okay
and now here I'm gonna go my next state
is gonna be my weight DRAM response
state okay yes
how does send requests so send requests
is one of your states and so I mean part
of what you're gonna be doing is
implementing what the rules are for each
you know what for each of these states
and so you're gonna you have access to
what the cache so so you so remember if
you're in the blocking cache right you
have access to this current and request
state register so you could always look
at it in order to determine things okay
so in fact let me now take the
opportunity to answer your question from
before which was what's the size of the
address when you make a line request so
because we're actually requesting you
know 16 words at a time it basically
means that your address is everything
from your original address - the offset
bits okay so when you create this line
address request here you're going to
take your tag from your initial request
and your index bits and concatenate them
together and that will make up your line
address make sense great okay so let's
see just have a few more minutes oh
we're almost there okay so let's move on
to the weight DRAM response state and so
what happens here is I'm going to check
my queue to see if I have something
available and if I do I get it from the
queue and then I'm going to extract
information from once again my current
request so that I know what to do with
this thing that I just got back so
specifically if my current request was a
load then
what I'm going to do is I'm going to
figure out the offset bits from my
initial request and I'm going to to
access this long you know 16 word line
at the offset that I actually want to
access so that I can give back to the
processor the specific word that it's
requesting okay and so what I'm going to
put into my hit queue is just a single
word so when I say line of W offset I'm
fetching the one word from that entire
line that I actually want okay and so
I'm giving that back to the processor
then in addition I'm updating my cau
with this line that was just sent to me
given to me from main memory and so I
update it with a status clean because I
just brought it in from main memory I
haven't made any changes to it so it's
valid and I have not written to it so
it's clean okay then if I detect that
instead I wanted to do a store now what
I have to do is I have to take this line
that I received from my main memory and
I have to modify it in the location
where of the word that I actually want
to change so I'm going to set line of W
offset to the data that I'm trying to
write and then I'm going to update my ca
you with this updated line and I'm gonna
mark the status as dirty because I
actually just did a right okay any
questions about that good and then when
I'm done with that I'm gonna go back to
the ready state okay so I actually think
well I'll just finish this one last
slide then the last slide is just talks
about the details of when you implement
the
the 2-way cache just what are the things
that you need to think about but just a
quick word on performance and we'll stop
here which is you know when I compare by
performance of a hit versus amiss the
hit is really very fast it's really just
dependent on the time that it takes me
to access my level 1 cache and assuming
that I implement my hit queue design
well you can basically kind of think of
it as one you know one clock cycle delay
when I have a hit when I have a Miss
however I have two possibilities I
either have to take something write
something back to my main memory or I
don't okay so if I don't have to write
something back to my main memory meaning
I didn't have anything dirty then I'm
just gonna have a data Ram load latency
and I'm gonna have two SRAM latencies
one was for my first check to see if it
was there and to realize that it's not
in the cache then I bring something from
a memory once I bring it into my memory
I sir get it look for it again in the
cache and I return it and then the last
one is if I do have something dirty so
now my latency is first I have to do a
store to main memory then I have to do a
read from main memory and I have this
two SRAM cost and so just you know to
keep in mind that the design decision of
actually looking at the SRAM twice it's
kind of inconsequential in comparison to
the amount of time it takes us to get to
the main memory and so we don't worry
about that at all and that's just
simplifies the implementation alright
everybody thank you and have a great day